and to Gaza now hundreds of thousands of
evacuees have fled rafar as repeated
international calls urge Israel to
exercise caution before launching a
ground offensive on the city Israel has
been fighting Hamas across Gaza since
the militant group carried out the
October 7th Terror attacks on Israel but
now Israeli soldiers are returning to
the north of the strip where Hamas
forces have regrouped in areas Israel
said it had cleared
the rush to get water in central gaza's
dear albala is desperate supplies here
were already low but the arrival of
thousands of evacuees from Rafa means
there is even less to go
around in dear alala people are now on
top of each other people are walking on
each other it's very crowded there's no
empty space those who are staying in
houses have some 10 displaced families
staying with them
for myself I was staying with my
children and my wife in a tent I now
have five or six families staying in the
tent with me it's very
crowded once deemed a safe Zone around
1.4 million people sought shelter in
rougher in recent months now they're
leaving as Israel ramps up its attacks
fleeing families have been forced to
uproot their lives again and
again I was suffering is continuous
we're tired of moving from a place to
another and those places are not near
each other from a city to another so we
need Transportation we're tired how long
will we have to stay in the
situation the United States has
repeatedly cautioned Israel against
expanding its offensive into ruer but
Israel insists the city is a Hamas
stronghold and that has to drive out
militants hiding there despite more than
7 months of War Hamas remains active
across the
territory this week Israeli soldiers
return to the north of Gaza an area it
claimed to have captured months
ago well for more on this Let's cross
over to DW's tanyaa in Jerusalem Tanya
if the Israeli Army is targeting
Northern Gaza again what does this mean
for the operation in the South around
rafar well all we can say at this point
is what it means means is that Israel is
fighting again with its ground forces in
on all fronts in the Gaza Strip and we
have seen also heavy uh air bombardment
across the Gaza Strip now in the north
uh Israeli troops were sent in again to
places like jabalia jabala refugee camp
zun which is in the western part in the
eastern part of uh Gaza and also other
parts in the northern Gaza Strip now
Israel withdrew from that area uh some
months ago
but intense fighting has now been
reported there also reports from
ambulances not being able to go into
certain areas now the internal messaging
here is that this was plan uh part of
the plan all along that the Army
withdrew but then also is able to go in
whenever uh they need to go in but
there's also a discussion and criticism
here saying that this is also a problem
because there is no plan for the day
after and that Hamas is able as the
Israeli Army said to regroup uh in such
areas but we've just seen the tramatic
scenes in the report what's happening in
the south of Gaza but also of course
there have been people they remained in
the in the northern uh part of Gaza and
those people as well they have been told
to uh to relocate to evacuate they're
forced to go to some other places to
Western uh uh parts of the northern Gaza
Strip and of course this is Northern
Gaza where in the past month we've been
talking about not enough Aid and goods
have been coming in so the situation uh
is of course also extremely difficult
for people there now Gaza has been left
without functioning government does
Israel have any clear plan for the
territory when the war is
over there has been no real official
plan that has been publicly at least
shared there have been some strategy
papers some announcement made by by
politicians we know more about what uh
the Israeli Prime Minister Benyamin
Netanyahu doesn't want uh to see in Gaza
he said that the Palestinian Authority
that's the entity that is uh governing
uh uh parts of the occupied West Bank in
a very limited rule there uh he doesn't
want to see them uh back in Gaza and
he's backed up by this by his far right
cabinet members so all of this also is
of course now another question looking
at uh the rafar offensive there we've
heard it from the United States as well
they have said there needs to be a
discussion uh what will the day after
look like because you know this not just
about um you know all the civilians that
there is no credible plan uh to evacuate
uh the civilians but what will happen
afterwards because uh prime minister
Benin Nan said time and time again that
he needs to go or the military rather
needs to go into rafar to eliminate
those four battalions of Hamas and then
uh that would enable Israel to achieve a
total Victory but apart from that of
course there's also a question will the
Palestinians be asked what they will
want to see uh who is governing uh Gaza
at the end of the war thew is Tanya
there reporting from Jerusalem thank you
very much Tanya meanwhile Sirens have
sounded across Israel in somber
ceremonies to Mark Memorial Day
this year's commemoration was dedicated
to the more than 1,00 people killed by
Hamas last year as well as the soldiers
who've died during the war in Gaza over
seven months on Israeli citizens are
still struggling to deal with the
Fallout of last October's attacks DW's
Israel correspondent T Kramer met with
two of them for this next
report Israeli photographer edes
kaganovich shows the faces of those who
survived the Hamas terror attack and
those who helped others on the day that
changed the
country I want to commemorate The
Bravery and optimism and sense of
resilience that I saw from the Israeli
citizen it was amazing to see how they
actually respond to the horrendous
terrorist attack on October 7th there
were so many amazing stories of people
who you know woke up in the morning and
and they decided to Rose up to that
moment and to save so many lives one of
them is Ramy davidan a farmer from a
village in southern Israel he and a
group of friends rescued hundreds of
mainly young partygoers at the Nova
Music
Festival Ramy and erz returned to the
site of the Rave today other portraits
stand here in Memorial to those killed
and those abducted to Gaza by Hamas
militants
Ramy answered a call from a friend and
raced here to help despite the risk of
Rocket attacks and running into
militants words spread quickly as
worried parents sent him locations on
WhatsApp to get their children to
safety after I rescued the first group
they circulated my phone number to other
groups and this is how the name Ramy and
my number spread like a
bushire because they had no one else to
turn
to he became a hero to many Israelis and
is often recognized but he says coming
back here is not
easy nothing will ever be like it was
before that
day for me Everything Has
Changed I have nightmares and flashbacks
of the hores I've seen and my body is
failing on me I'm not the same Ramy I'm
no longer a happy
person personal stories like ramies are
at the heart of the exhibition but they
also highlight a deeper change that took
place on October 7th one that many
Israelis are still struggling
with actually what happened on October 7
is that something very essential broke
on that morning and when you grew up in
Israel you grew up with a sense that no
matter what it's going to happen the IDF
and the Israeli government will do
everything in their own power to
actually to to safeguard the Israeli
citizens but on October 7th we realized
that the Army wasn't there and the
government wasn't there and people were
left to their own
destiny despite the suffering that
people experienced that day edes
kaganovich wants the stories behind
these photos to resilience and optimism
for people to look
forward I'm joined in the studio now by
our Middle East analyst shaie rosanes
shaie good to have you here again now
Memorial Day is always a very emotional
affair in Israel this was the first time
it was being marked since October 7th
how was this year different well it's
probably the most dire that Israel has
seen in the last 50 years um you could
feel the atmosphere was heavy uh the
ceremonies were you know everything is
over clouded by the trauma of October
7th which is still very much alive in
Israel's uh National psyche people's
memories you know many Israelis are
still on October 7th those who have lost
their loved ones those who still have
hostages kept in Gaza October 7th is
still very much alive uh for Israelis
and today of all days you know trying to
you know Memorial Day tries to maybe
close a circle try to move on you know
commemorate and maybe talk about the
resilience about you know coming from
the ashes it's still very hard for most
Israelis who still are very much feeling
those wounds very deep yeah something
we've heard time and time again since
October 7th and in this report again is
that it was an event that kind of
shattered people's trust not only in the
security that Israel as you know as a
safe haven for for Jews from around the
world promised but also in in the IDF
and in the government how has that
changed well there's no different no
doubt Israel is a different country
after October 7th and and to the very
most fundamental elements of the trust
in government and people's you know
connection with their with with the with
the government with with the entity that
has called the state of Israel some has
grew stronger in their connection to
that and to the ideas leading it some
have been pulled apart we need to
remember this is still happening you
know for Israel is this war is still
ongoing you know the world rightfully so
focuses on Gaza but there's still a very
active uh going also in the North of
Israel where there's been shelling on
and on and on no end today we've also
seen you know Israelis have counted more
people wounded there you know they still
Israel is still feel under attack and
this ongoing um challenges that the
Israel and the you know Israeli
government and the Israeli IDF are
experiencing in protecting Israelis and
bringing this war to an end it's
becoming very uh you know grinding for
Israelis they're starting to slowly
realize that this cycle this you know
you know that they thought would be
quick and done is far from being over
and there's more and more Despair and
fear for what may come that is slowly
crippling in let's look at Prime
Minister netanyahu's role in all of this
because he was already under intense
pressure before October 7th how do
Israelis feel about him today you know
it's it's it's a mixed bag you know many
times in a war you see a lot of people
you know come around their leader come
together trying to sort of overcome the
hardship netan has always been a very
divid
figure you know and especially after you
know the backdrop for for the attack was
you know uh the attempt for a a reform
in the judicial system who basically
tore Israel apart these these uh tears
are still there uh even though you know
October 7th kind of brought everybody
together for a short while the issue of
netan himself is still very much on the
on the table and we see Nan himself this
this Memorial Day and also in the
tomorrow will be Independence Day in
Israel he's going to be very much uh
reserved you know he already announced
can canceling his participation in some
of the lead events of the day that were
usually the the prime day for the prime
minister to be taken uh to take part in
and and there's this fear now or there's
these rumors that he's basically hiding
from the future he's afraid of the
scrutiny he's afraid of the criticism
and he's uh we're seeing a very unusual
uh behavior for when it comes to netan
it's still too soon to say if that will
lead to any political circumstances
because we have not seen him take full
responsibility for his role and the
government's role he's still talking
about the need for everybody to be
examined and not only him and his role
in it so that anger that criticism there
still not uh being seen as bringing
leading to any changes on the ground in
Israel yet October 7th LED then to the
incursion into Gaza and that campaign
has drawn increasing International
criticism are Israelis as divided about
what's happening in Gaza as the rest of
of the world well unfortunately Israelis
are not very much aware of what happens
in Gaza the Israeli media shelters
Israelis from seeing the the hard unbe
terrible uh photos that are coming from
Gaza from realizing the magnitude of of
of the tragedy and and the and the and
the and the killing in Gaza and Israelis
are also not feels like feel like the
national mood is such they cannot
contain that anymore there is a big
debate on whether fighting until the
erosion of Hamas is achieved which is
the goal that the government has set
himself is still an achievable goal and
is it still worth fighting even in the
price of losing the lives of the
hostages keep in Gaza this is a very big
issue still tearing Israel apart uh but
um but the faith of the Palestinians
Gaza is not on the agenda for Israelis
DW sh rosan is always great to get your
insights thank you so much thank you
Nicole